The Winner and New...

                             by Ib Melchior




  _We have long been convinced that there is something about science
  fantasy which attracts, in electro-magnetic fashion, the brilliant
  sons of famous authors, artists, actors, physicians and tenors.
  Fritz Leiber, Jr., Manly Wade Wellman, and Samuel Merwin, Jr. are
  three writers of distinction in the genre we could mention in this
  connection. And now comes Ib Melchior with his second story for us,
  to strengthen our conviction quite unshakably. It is both gratifying
  to find a pet theory confirmed and to publish a story as unusual as
  this by a TV director who can tune in on the future at will!_

  =A TV Emcee may assume anything he wishes about the big question
  contest lads. But it’s unusual when they know all about Mars!=




“Hello-hello-hello! This is Bob May wishing a wonderful Quizz Night to
one and all!”

The effervescent young man came bounding out on the brilliantly lighted
stage of the gigantic Capitol Coliseum. The perpetual smile never left
his handsome face, but a note of studied sincerity crept into his voice
as he continued:

“From all of us here I want to welcome all of you out there in the
Coliseum auditorium, and all you folks gathered around the over one
hundred million TV sets watching us tonight. Yes, folks, tonight’s the
night! The one day in the week I know you impatiently wait for. But
before we settle down to the important business at hand, here is a
little message which I know will be of interest to you.”

The lights pouring down upon the young Quizz Master dimmed, and
simultaneously another part of the big stage became brightly
illuminated. The small tally lights on the TV camera aimed at the area
sprang to life with a red glow. A breathtakingly beautiful girl stood
smiling in front of the camera. After a musical fanfare she addressed
the vast, unseen TV audience, her honied words rolling off her tongue
in dulcet, sexy tones.

“Hi! Here I am again, your own Barrie Rose, to tell you about a
_simply super_ new product created for you by those _wonderful_ people
at REJUVENATION! Remember, only REJUVENATION products are _The Real
Thing_--accept no substitutes! And now REJUVENATION has come up with
something brand new. It is ...”

The orchestra launched into an impressive fanfare.

“... REJUVENATION’S new, unequaled _Plasti-Form Spray!_ It comes in
eight gorgeous, life-like colors and textures. Tough-hard _Plasti-Form
Spray_ for men, and soft, silken textures for women. Are you
dissatisfied with your build? Is your figure sub-standard? If you
want masculine muscles or enticing curves get REJUVENATION’S all-new
_Plasti-Form Spray!_ So easy to apply a child of five can do it! Take
Barrie Rose’s word for it, REJUVENATION’S _Plasti-Form Spray_. It’s
marvelorious!! And now, back to Bob May, and the contest you’ve all
been waiting for.”

Again the lights bathed the Quizz Master with their brilliance. This
time the young man was joined by two others--one a rather stout, partly
bald gentleman with old-fashioned rim-glasses, the other a younger,
more robust looking fellow with a shock of iron-gray hair.

“Well, well, here we are again! And here, Ladies and Gentlemen, are our
contestants. I hardly need introduce our Incumbent to you--forty-nine
weeks undefeated. Here he is--_Charles Monroe!_” The little stout man
stepped forward and took a bow. The applause was thunderous in the vast
hall. Then Monroe nervously fingered his rim-glasses and returned to
his place.

“And here, Ladies and Gentlemen, we have this week’s Challenger, Mr.
_James Burton!_”

The applause was almost as deafening. Burton stepped forward and waved
confidently to the multitude.

Bob May quickly interposed: “Folks! You all know how The Quizz is
held--and how important it is. You remember that Mr. Monroe’s category
is _Philately_--and he certainly has shown us that there’s little he
doesn’t know about postage stamps!”

He turned purposefully to Burton. His voice was tense with excitement
as it rang out in the hushed auditorium: “And now, Mr. Burton, will you
tell us--_what is your category?_”

A gaudy, multi-colored panel of many category listings suddenly blazed
on across the back of the stage. Burton slowly turned and regarded the
panel. The huge auditorium was whisper-silent. Then Burton said: “_The
Planet Mars!_”

Bob May fairly jumped off the stage in his tempestuous excitement.
“Ladies and Gentlemen! Our Challenger picks as his quizz category--_The
Planet Mars!_”

The audience roared its delight.

“All right! You both know what to expect. The questions in your
respective categories are selected by our own Univac Cybernetic Brain.
No human being knows what they will be until _I_ ask you the questions!
Are you ready?”

Monroe swallowed nervously and adjusted his funny spectacles. He nodded.

Burton answered: “Yes, sir, Mr. May!”

“Good! As you know each one of you will be asked questions of
increasing difficulty--until one of you misses! The survivor is the
winner! But just so that you will have no outside disturbances--or
help--” he waved a waggish finger at them--“you’ll be enclosed in the
special Force-Field. Nothing can penetrate, no light, no sound, no
telepathic prompting! We can all see you, but you can’t see us. That
should be a comfort!”

He laughed uproariously at his own joke. “Only _I_ can talk to you
through my special communicator. But we can all hear your answers. And
now--are you ready?”

Both contestants nodded.

“Here we go, then! But first....”

The commercial message by Barrie Rose over the cameras once again
focused on Bob May and the two contestants. Around both the Incumbent
and the Challenger hovered a curious shimmering, completely transparent
shell. As the cameras went on, two metal rods ending in small
cylindrical two-way transmitter heads rose out of the floor in front of
each of the two contestants.

May adjusted his throat transmitter. “Can you hear me, gentlemen?” he
asked.

“Yes,” croaked Monroe. He had a frog in his throat.

“Perfectly,” said Burton.

“Stand by for your first question then, Mr. Burton,” said May.

He turned to Barrie Rose who was standing off to one side.

“The first question from Univac,” he said tensely.

Barrie Rose touched a button. Immediately a multitude of flashing
lights on a huge panel traced an intricate pattern across the banks
upon banks of small bulbs on the board. In less than a second there was
an audible click, and Barrie Rose extracted a printed card from the
machine. On it was Burton’s first question. Bob May winced when he read
it.

“Mr. Burton,” he said, his voice ominously serious, “here it is: One of
the most amazing cases of the purest coincidence known to the history
of astronomy occurred when a medieval author in a book of fiction
predicted that Mars has _two moons!_ For your first question--what was
the name of the book? Who wrote it? And when was it published?”

Burton’s brow knitted. The audience held its breath. It was not an
easy question. Would the Challenger flunk out at his first try? Then
Burton straightened up: “The book was ‘Gulliver’s Travels,’ published
in seventeen twenty-six and written by one Jonathan Quick--no.
_Swift_--Jonathan Swift!”

“Correct!” shouted Bob May.

The audience applauded wildly.

“Mr. Monroe’s first question, Barrie Rose!”

“Here it is!” Bob May read earnestly: “One of the former Presidents of
the United States was a famous stamp collector. During a war fought
under his administration he advocated the occupation of a small island
by United States troops because of his knowledge of that island through
his hobby. For _your_ first question--who was the President? What was
the name of the island? In which postal district was it situated?”

Almost before May had finished reading the question Monroe answered:
“Franklin Delano Roosevelt. The island was Mangareva in the postal
district of Tahiti!”

“Right, Mr. Monroe! Right!” bellowed the Quizz Master, and the audience
clapped and whistled and stamped its feet.

The questioning continued. The contestants ran neck to neck. But the
strain began to tell. Monroe’s glasses--forgotten--slid down his nose;
Burton’s shock of hair became disarranged. They had been at it for more
than two hours, interrupted only by the REJUVENATION commercials after
each set of questions.

The tension in the audience and throughout the nation was mounting. And
still Bob May kept on asking questions: “Your seventeenth question,
Burton. What is the highest point on Mars? How high is it? Who
discovered it, and when?”

“Mount Kepler! It’s a little over eighteen thousand feet above Canal
Level. Discovered by Captain Peter Eriksen on the Third Martian
Expedition in the year two thousand and seventeen.”

“Correct!”

“Monroe--question seventeen for you. On what Twentieth Century stamps
do you find the overprint, Z.A.? What do these letters stand for?”

“On stamps from old Armenia. Z.A. stands for _Zapadnya Armia_, meaning
Western Army!”

“Correct!”

“Burton, number eighteen--it’s a toughie! Of the over nine thousand
different Martian plants, eight thousand and five are lichens and
mosses. Of the remaining varieties which one is the rarest, and how
does this plant multiply?”

Burton ran his hands through his already disheveled hair. His voice
had long ago lost its cockiness. He hesitated in concentration for a
moment, and then said: “I believe it’s the Lizard Cactus. Its needles,
bearing the spores, get stuck between the scales of the Lesser Canali
Lizard and poison it. Then it uses the moisture of the animal to start
the growth of the new plant.”

“Right! Right all the way!”

“And you, Mr. Monroe, your eighteenth--another tough one! Of the
so-called Presidential Series of postage stamps in use in the United
States in the third quarter of the Twentieth Century what was the color
of the three-cent stamp? And whose portrait was on it?”

Monroe licked his lips. Absentmindedly he pushed his glasses up. The
great hall was breathlessly quiet. Monroe was getting visibly tired!

“The three-cent stamp was--eh--deep violet, and--the portrait was
of--of--George Washington!”

Bob May sucked in his breath. “No!” he exploded, “No! It was Thomas
Jefferson! _You are wrong!!!_”

The audience gasped.

Wrong!

Monroe stood ashen-faced inside the Force-Field. Little beads of sweat
were forming on his forehead and a tiny artery in his temple beat--and
beat--and beat....

He did not utter a sound.

“I’m sorry,” said Bob May in sepulchral tones. “Genuinely, deeply
sorry!”

The communicator in front of Monroe quickly sank down through the
floor. The shimmering shell around the man seemed for a moment to
intensify. Then with lightning speed it collapsed upon itself and
disappeared in a blinding implosion--and with it Charles Monroe!

Bob May whirled on the spellbound audience. In ecstatic frenzy he
shrieked: “I give you _James Burton_--the Winner and New President of
the United States!”

The great audience went crazy!




Transcriber’s Note:


  This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe, July 1956 (Vol. 5,
No. 6). Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.

  Obvious errors in punctuation have been silently corrected in this
version, while spelling and hyphenation have been kept as is.